---
title: 'Patriotism'
date: 2025-04-30
permalink: /posts/2025/04/patriotism/
author_profile: false
related: false
tags:
  - nonsense
---
Today marks 50 years since the reunification of North and South Vietnam. After enduring a series of wars against France, Japan, the United States, and China, Vietnam achieved full independence and national unity on April 30, 1975, ending more than a hundred years of foreign domination and division. This important day means a lot to the Vietnamese people and reminds us not only of history, but also of the many personal stories that are part of our country's journey to freedom, like the stories of my paternal grandparents.

Unlike my younger sister, who grew up mostly with our maternal grandparents, I spent a large part of my childhood with my paternal grandparents. During my primary school years, my father was still serving in the army and was often away from home. At the same time, my mother had just entered university to pursue a degree in education, hoping to support her future career. So, I stayed with my grandparents, a period filled with stories, care, and simple but lasting memories.

My grandfather was a veteran of the anti-French resistance. It seems like his background seemed to shape him into a very honest and straightforward person, sometimes a bit hot-tempered and had a high ego, but not violent at all. Despite his serious demeanor, he was always gentle with me. He almost did all the parent meetings during my primary school time and usually told fairy tales for me and my friend when they came to play. He was the one who helped me make a wooden sword for my silly childish games. I remember he kept all his stuff belonging to him in an old wardrobe, also where he kept my piggy bank. He had an old silver watch that no longer worked, but he still wore it to formal events. At every meal, he would take his special spice, which was made from fish sauce and a lot of chillies. He might be angry with me about something in the afternoon, but seemed to immediately forget and treat me normally at dinner.

I heard many stories about his time in the army, some directly from him, others from my parents and relatives. My grandmother, however, rarely talked about those years. In fact, she once grumbled when grandpa began recounting a war story in front of me. Still, I slowly pieced together their past.

Grandpa wasn't originally from the province where my father and uncles were born. He came from a nearby region that saw some of the fiercest fighting during the war against the US. Born into a landowning family, he lied about his age to join the army early. One story he shared stayed with me. During a battle, he was shot in the leg, while many of his comrades were killed. The first thing he did after being hit was to bury his gun in the sand so that the enemy wouldn’t find it. After that, he was captured and sent to a French hospital for treatment. There, by chance, he met an old friend who was working as a doctor on the French side. They had a brief conversation. Grandpa asked him why he was there, and the friend simply replied, “Just for bread and butter.” 

War created strange intersections like that. Grandma, who later became his wife, was shaped by that same brutal period. During the time grandpa was a prisoner, tortured and tied naked to a post, it was her who untied him, even though she had been warned that helping him would get her in trouble with the enemy. He asked her if she was afraid, she said "If i am afraid I will not be here". She never boasted about it. In fact, she rarely mentioned it at all.

Talking about grandma, she is a strangely optimistic woman, but sometimes hard to understand. I spent countless nights sleeping in her arms as a child. She tried to cook dishes I liked just to make me happy, although her cooking skills are not as good as my mom. She was gentle with grandpa, and always full of compassion for people. Grandpa, aside from being a war veteran, was also highly educated. He had a university degree in economics, was fluent in French, and served as vice president of the district for a time. He was once even sent to Hungary for work training, a rare and prestigious opportunity in those days. But even with such a respected job, their life wasn’t wealthy. Because he worked during the subsidy period, their income was just enough to cover daily living costs and raise their children. 

One story my grandma told me made a strong impression. Years after the war, a French survey team came to Vietnam to search for the remains of their fallen soldiers. The Vietnamese side guided them to a burial site, but the team questioned the authenticity of skeletons, whether we left out cattle bones instead. Offended by the accusation, grandpa, who was serving as an interpreter, confronted them in French and argued fiercely in defense of our people’s honesty. Those memories have remained with me to this day.

They lived quietly together like that, day by day, for decades. It seemed that my grandpa was well-respected in the neighborhood because of his generosity and frankness. On the day he passed away, so many people came to light incense for him, more than I had ever seen at any funeral. I was surprised and confused, but one of my uncles gently explained to me who each of them was. That day, I also saw something I had never seen before: my father, who had always seemed strong, broke down and cried like a child.

---

Today, when I walk the streets of France, the country my grandparents once fought against, as a foreign student, I often think about them. Sometimes at lunch with labmates, I was also asked about that, the war, and I did not hesitate to tell them about his story and my thoughts. The purpose is not to cause division or hatred, but to receive and exchange culture. The pain of war still exists, but choosing to move forward to develop the country is much more important.

For me, I do not consider myself as a patriot. Mainly because military service is something male people usually try to avoid (in an active or passive way), at least for the people I know. In Vietnam, many people who have gone to university and have a stable job don’t want to join the army. It’s often seen as a game of luck, you might get selected, or you might not, depending on chance. People prefer to focus on building a career and make money, and don’t want to lose two years of lives to military service. In my case, I pursued my education from engineering to PhD in a foreign country without a long gap, so the exemption was not too difficult. Even if I was selected, it's hard to deny that I would like it. Maybe I'm a bit rigid, but to **love** your country, you need to perform your duty without hesitation. 

On some other aspects, I want to contribute to the development of Vietnam, at least with my expertise. But I don’t think I have to force myself to return just for that. I’ll stay where I feel truly happy (for now it is 🇻🇳). Anyway, actions always speak louder than words, right? Also, when talking with my labmates, I’ve noticed that most of what they know about Vietnam is related to war. I’m not saying that’s a bad thing, but I do believe it’s important to help people see that Vietnam has more things to explore than the history of conflict.

